&intro1=My name is Perikles, and I was once Athens’ leading statesman. Around 450 BC I persuaded the people of Athens to rebuild the temples on the Acropolis, after they had been left in ruins following a Persian invasion in 480 BC. 
<br>Athena was our patron goddess. Our main festival for Athena, the Panathenaia, included a procession, which is beautifully carved onto the outside walls of Athens’ most famous temple, the Parthenon. 
<br>It was here that the goddess Athena was honoured every year on her birthday, with an extra special celebration every four years. After the procession, we Athenians would present Athena with her new robe. 
&intro2=Like many ancient Greek festivals, the Panathenaia involved not just a procession, but competitions and sacrifices to the gods. The Parthenon frieze captures these events in stone and presents them along the sides of the building.
<br>Follow the procession as it unfolds along the north side of the Parthenon. Whenever you see me pop up, click on me to find out more about the frieze.
&page1=Along the west frieze, horsemen prepare for the procession to the Acropolis. Clothes are adjusted and horses are coaxed into position. Let the Panathenaia begin! About to turn the corner, a rider seems to be signalling to the others before processing down the long stretch of the building. 
&page1b=I gave an artist friend of mine the job of designing the frieze. The result was truly a masterpiece admired by all who saw it – even those who see it today. Pheidias designed the frieze in such a way that the procession splits in two. One branch runs along the long south side of the temple and the other branch runs along the long north side.
&page2=Ranks of six or seven horses ride side by side down the first section of the north frieze. The horseman here with his arm raised would have once held a short whip. Some of the young men wear body armour and crested helmets. Cloaks and the horses’ manes fly back in the breeze. 
&page2b=Here you can see horses and riders fanned out, like a deck of cards. The design is meant to show horses riding side by side, but by cleverly overlapping the horses like this, we are given a sense of the procession’s depth. It is amazing to think that all these overlapping horses emerge from a thickness of stone never greater than 5 centimetres.
&page3=A chariot race! Horses arch their tails in readiness and onlookers leap away from the rushing wheels and clattering hooves, as the warriors leap in and out of the carts with great skill.<br><br>The winners of the apobates event and other competitions were given special jars of olive oil - an appropriate prize because Athena’s gift to Athens was the olive tree. On one side of the prize jars, called amphorae, was a picture of Athena with her spear raised and the words, ‘From the games at Athens.’ On the other side was painted the event that the winner had competed in.  
&page3b=When we carved the Parthenon frieze we painted it in bright colours, and then attached metal objects such as spears and horses’ bridles. The paint has long since gone, but you can sometimes still see the holes that were drilled into the marble for the bridles.
&page4=A racing chariot is pulled up suddenly, as the horse parade leads to a group of people on foot. First come bearded elders, moving at a much calmer pace. These might be the winners of a beauty contest held for older men, or perhaps these are the officials who organized the festivities. 
&page4b=For us, the Parthenon frieze was like a glossy advertisement for the Athenian way of life. It was a showpiece for our city’s values, our politics, our military, and our arts and athletics. 
&page5=The ancient Greeks were music lovers, and music played an important part in their festivals. Two popular Greek instruments were the kithara, a large wooden, stringed instrument played with a plectrum, and the double-aulos, a pair of pipes. Both are played here as part of the procession leading to Athena. 
&page5b=The Parthenon was built using white marble taken from Mount Pentelikon. This mountain is 16 kilometres from the site. Cutting the marble from the mountain and transporting it was very expensive.
&page6=After the rush of the horses, the procession is now much calmer. We are preparing to meet the gods, waiting for the final offerings. Here, young men carry jars, which may have contained water. Greek sacrifices involved special washing ceremonies which made the offerings acceptable to the gods. 
&page6b=Not everyone liked my grand plans and some thought I was spending too much public money. However, at the time, Athens was very rich and enjoying a rare time of peace. We wanted to show our patron goddess Athena how grateful we were – and the rest of the Greek world how superior we were! 
&page7=These men are carrying large trays filled with honeycombs and small cakes. Because they are walking behind the animals that are soon to be sacrificed, perhaps these treats were needed to coax the creatures to the altar where they would be killed. 
&page7b=We began building the Parthenon in 447 BC. By 438 BC it was built, with the sculpture and other decorations taking six more years. Not bad considering we had no electric tools or bulldozers – only the physical strength of our men and animals and the skill of our craftsmen. 
&page8=As the procession reaches the end of its journey, the final scene here is of the animals being led to sacrifice. Some are calm, but others are looking more distressed, straining against the men trying to hold them. 
&page8b=The line of people in the frieze could have looked repetitive and boring if everyone was shown in the same position, but the designer posed people in lots of different ways, so that the procession looks lively and interesting.
&page9=The east frieze is where the two branches of the procession face each other over the doorway to the temple. It is here that we see the high point of the event.<br><br>As we turn the corner, we see women for the first time. Young girls walk in single file towards the gods. Some carry shallow bowls called phialai, whilst another carries a tall incense holder for burning sweet-smelling perfumes.
&page9b=The frieze itself was carved by several sculptors. After the architecture was completed in 438 BC, the carvers of the frieze worked solidly for a further 6 years. 
&page11=After a group of magistrates or heroes, a large group of gods sit, waiting for the arrival of the procession. The gods include Hermes, Dionysos, Demeter, Ares, Hera, Hephaistos, Poseidon, Apollo, Artemis, Aphrodite and Eros. In the two centre-most and most important positions sit Zeus and Athena. 
&page11b=On the frieze the gods are shown larger than normal people. The ordinary people are standing, whilst the larger figures of the gods are shown sitting down, so as to fit within the height of the frieze. 
&page10=Right at the heart of the east frieze, a child and a man hold up the folded peplos. This was Athena’s special robe, which had been skillfully woven by Athenian women and girls. The robe would be presented to the priestess and then sacrifices were made. A great feast for the whole of Athens would follow. 
&page10b=Although the Parthenon cost us a lot of money to build, many people benefited from this project. There was a lot of work for carpenters, stone-cutters, workers in gold and ivory, shippers and wagon-drivers. And of course the people of Athens now had a beautiful temple at the heart of their city!